Theory of crystalline structures 130 years since the publication of the work of E.S. Fedorov on 230 crystallographic immetry groups Concentration of crystalline structures into high-dimensional structures of type (traphareta)  FACTS of crystalline dynamics It was last updated on 10/11/2020. After finishing the 14/02/2021 Adopted on 25 February 2021 The results of crystallographic analysis of popular structural types formed the basis for the proposed model of translational symmetry as a complex of standing flat elastic waves creating three-dimensional grids of nodes of their intersections. When taking into account the additional symmetrical arrangement of atoms in the volume of the elementary cell, the criteria for the stability of crystal structures are proposed, characterizing the reduction of the degrees of freedom of atoms. The characteristics of a number of highly symmetrical structures of cubic and hexagonal symmetry are compared. The universal process of creating stable states by forming symmetrical spatial configurations for material particles is proposed to be called crystallodynamics. What is it? 2021 marks 130 years since the publication of the founding work of Y.S. Fedorov on 230 crystallographic symmetry groups [1]. Unlike the mathematician A.M. Shenflis, who worked in this field, Fedorov considered geometric space not abstract, but as filled with  atoms of matter, of which there was no clear idea at the time. The successes of physics and X-ray structural analysis have given hundreds of thousands of crystal structures and required generalizing these knowledge. Among the important works here, it is impossible not to mention the works of Wells [2], as well as, for example, the works on the classification of minerals of G. Strunz [3], A.S. Powerenin [4], Kostow [5] and others. These and many other works on more private cases have shown that there is a tendency to force structures with different atomic composition to merge into groups with close atomic configuration  into structural types (or some spatial traphate [6]). It is clear that each trapheret  is an energy-stable configuration of these atoms, so the process of crystallization should be considered not only as achieving a certain symmetry, but also as achieving a state with minimal internal energy. Almost three decades ago, the foundations of crystallographic analysis of structures were laid [7], now we can already talk about crystallodynamics, which considers increasing stability by ordering the positions of material particles (unlike thermodynamics, where entropy growth is declared, and crystalline structures have entropy assumed to be zero). Below are examples of crystal structures belonging to common structural types [2] and comparative assessments of the relative stability of the proposed crystal state formation model [7]. The crystallization model Consider the crystallizing substance as a heterogeneous medium with some average modulus of elasticity created by inter-atomic interactions. All material particles (atoms) participate in their own heat oscillations as well as in joint movements of different types. In the process of energy loss, these movements transition into the most energy-efficient standing waves  linear harmonic oscillations. Let's remember that standing waves are the sum of two equal waves of opposite amplitude and frequency that travel in opposite directions. They have in the space of three dimensions a plane with zero amplitude  the plane of nodes divided by a distance of half the length of the standing wave, and a plane with maximum amplitude  in the middle between the plane of nodes [8]. The one-dimensional model (string oscillations) is shown in Figure 1. Each standing wave, by ordering the positions of the atoms and moving the heaviest to the planes of the nodes with minimal kinetic energy, creates a translations order in the direction, the perpendicular wave front. Losing energy (the heat of crystallization), atoms in different combinations  depending on their mass, size, coordination with neighbors  form standing waves of different directions and frequencies (the most energy-intensive will correspond to half the wavelength nearest the shortest boundary distances, as they will correspond to the maximum number of atoms inhabited). Any three waves will give a three-dimensional network of nodes  of intersections of the node planes, i.e. a broadcast grid. Standing waves are not known to dissipate energy. This explanation of the origin of the translational symmetry of the main symmetry of the crystal has no alternative. By the way, crystallography courses don't usually discuss the mechanism of transmission symmetry. Each atom, participating in different standing waves, cannot be in all the node planes, but will be near their intersection points, i.e. create a pseudo-transmission arrangement. The process goes to the stage where these standing waves are formed, half of which are true transmissions for all atoms, and the previous ordering  are the grids of the true transition lattice. In this process, the many configurations of atoms present in the crystallizing substance are reduced to repeated configurations of atoms in the volume of the elementary cell. In other words, the degrees of freedom of all atoms are reduced to the degrees of freedom of atoms of a single elementary cell. Additional limitation of the degrees of freedom of atoms in the volume of the elementary cell is carried out by the elements of point symmetry, sliding planes, screw axes. Thus, the plane of mirror reflection deprives the atoms lying within it of one of three degrees of freedom, the axis of rotation of two degrees, the center of symmetry of three degrees. This is done for both sliding planes and screw axes. The criteria for stability are defined by symmetry. The stability of the material  the ability to maintain structure when temperature, pressure changes in wide ranges  is largely dependent on the nature of chemical bonds between atoms. However, if we are dealing with substances that are closely related in composition or with phases of the same substance, we can only offer criteria based on the symmetry of the crystal structure. Based on general considerations and analysis of specific structures, we will stop at the fundamental volume V*, which represents an independent part of the volume of the elementary cell sufficient to describe the entire structure: V*= V0/M. Here M  is the order of the symmetry space group (the set of symmetry operations in the elementary cell, or the maximum multiplicity of the position in it). The smaller the V*, the more stable the structure is, because it has the minimum degrees of freedom of atoms. The second criterion is the ratio of the number of degrees of freedom of the base atoms of the structure ns  to the number of atoms in the primitive cell np: S = ns/np. The smaller S, the more stable the structure, since the lower degrees of freedom of atoms in volume V* are. The minimum values of V* should be expected in cubic groups of symmetry, where the value of M reaches 192 (e.g. gr. Fmm and its subgroups). In hexagonal structures the maximum value M = 24 (P6/mmm and its subgroups). Criteria S are also minimal in these groups. In particular, for the structures of many metals, known as highly stable materials, it is equal to zero (copper, iron, aluminum, their alloys, and others). CRISTALGRAPHIC ANALYSIS  The method of studying the mutual separation of atoms in structures The method is based on the fact that the mutual arrangement of different combinations of structure atoms in the node planes of the same standing linear waves (these are actually crystallographic planes (hkl)) can be controlled by known programs of Fhkl structural amplitude calculation. If the relatively large amount of the Fhkl computational amplitude obtained for one variety of atoms increases significantly when added to the calculation of another variety, this means that this plane (hkl) orders both types of atoms simultaneously. When there are several such planes, combining them into three, we fix the joint rings of atoms in this structure. As a rule, cationes and anions in inorganic structures are arranged in different planes (hkl). But the arrangement of large cations Cs+, Tl+ and others along with nearby O2, S2 anions has also been proven. The reason for the joint arrangement is not only to achieve a more dense packaging, but also to have a more symmetrical joint mesh. The calculations of the attachments are carried out under a special program [10]. V* and S in the following structures Let's show the characteristics of the stability of the structures of the popular structural types of cubic and hexagonal symmetry and the tendency to reduce the degrees of freedom of atoms. The details of the research are given in the original works of this cycle. Let's start with the structure of the diamond, which demonstrates the advantage of symmetry over packaging density: out of eight tetrahedral and four octahedral voids, only four tetrahedral cells are occupied by atoms (fig. 2a). Diamond has one of the minimum values of V*: only 0.24 Å3 is enough to form its elementary cell with 192 symmetry operations. The basic carbon atom is fixed at the beginning of the coordinates, and all  atoms are in the intersection nodes of many crystallographic plane families, including the most filled with plane atoms {220} [11]. Substances with more complex atomic compositions, such as spinyl MgAl2O4, strive for maximum symmetry by making the structure more complex. The elementary cell of the spindle doubles the diamond cell's parameter, and there are two options for placing atoms in eight octants (sublimations) (fig. 2b, 2v). All cation are symmetrical, meaning they are free of degrees of freedom, and oxygen anions are on three axes (a base atom with xx coordinates with one degree of freedom). In the structural type of CsAlSi2O6 (Iad) 1/8 of the elementary cell is shown in Fig. 2g. The heavy cation Cs is recorded by symmetry, the cation Al on the triple axis has one degree of freedom, the oxygen atoms are in the general position (three degrees of freedom, not shown in the figure) [6]. In the representative of the structural type of elpassolite Rb2NaAlF6 (Fmm), only the anion F has one degree of freedom (shift along the coordinate axis), as can be seen in Fig. 2d, where 1/8 of the elementary cell is shown. An example of a more complex structure is the ring tetraphosphate (Al,V) 4 (P4O12) 3 (I3d), 1/8 of which is shown in a somewhat idealized form in Fig. 2e. Only the cation Al is fixed on a triple axis, the phosphorus atom  in the general position, but close to the position 1/8 1/8 1/8 [12]. The list of common cubic structural types is completed by the structure of the Al2Ca3 ((SiO4) 3 granate, whose cationary frame is completely symmetrically fixed, and only oxygen atoms have three degrees of freedom in 1/96 parts of the elementary cell (fig. 1j). Table 1 provides criteria for V* and S for representatives of cubic structures. Popular structural types of hexagonal symmetry (e.g. P6/mmm and its subgroups with M = 24) will be considered from the class of politicalps [2]. They alternate with the layers of anions, which include the large cation, and the layers of cations, where the numerous medium cations are arranged with the large cation. The parameters of the hexagonal structure with almost identical parameters a (fig. 3a) depend on the stehiometry of large and medium cations. The structure of BaV6O11 is also arranged according to the structure of the ferrites SrAl12O19 and BaFe18O27 [13]. The ratio of the numbers of medium and large cations in them is 1: 6, 1: 12, 1: 18, and in connection with these ratios the parameter with the structures changes (fig. 3b, 3v, 3g). Compounds with more complex atomic composition crystallize with larger elementary cells (table 2). The criteria V* and S in hexagonal structures are noticeably larger in size, and it is logical to look for reasons to exclude the possibility of crystallizing them in cubic symmetry. One of the reasons is probably the formation of stable atomic clusters in the crystallizing phase with a local symmetry that is not cubic. Thus, in the structure of VaV6O11 there is a fragment  two VO6-octads with a common border and, therefore, with a shortened distance VV and a possible interaction of metalmetal. The overall edge of the VO6-octaders stimulates the emergence of a mirror plane of symmetry that matches it, and overall this fragment  germ with a local symmetry of 63/m. In cubic structures, such a combination of symmetry cannot be. Similar situations occur in other structures. Assuming the cubic symmetry is more stable than the hexagonal one, let's note some interesting facts about hexagonal structures. Theoretically, a hexagonal structure can be obtained by compressing or stretching a cube along one of the four triple axes. In fact, in structures such as turmaline, corundum, and the same polyps, cationes and anions are arranged with exactly this deformed cubic substrate [11, 13, 14]. The closure The crystalline structure is determined by the compromise of the forces of local boundary interactions (including local electrostatics) and the forces of long-range, elastic ones, creating the ordering of  translations and other symmetry. In the modern description of crystal structures, the first side, called crystallochemistry, dominates, although it is actually stereochemistry. The other side is logically called crystallodynamics, and it is it that determines the characteristics of the crystalline state of matter. Numerous examples are known when substances with the most diverse atomic compositions crystallize into the same type of structure  traphate. To get into the most stable traphate, the larger Mg in the spine, for example, is found in the tetrahedral oxygen environment, and the smaller Al  in the octahedral. In this work, only the most symmetrical trapheres of crystal structures are considered, where the role of symmetry, which reduces information about structure (i.e. the volume of the information cell V*), is obvious. But this tendency to increase stability through the possibilities of symmetry (reduction of the degrees of freedom of material objects of structure) is present everywhere, even if defects are formed [9, 11]. As general principles of crystal structure organization, L. Poling's rules (.) are still used, taking into account electrostatic interactions between atoms and general considerations about minimizing structure fragments. Actually, only the fifth rule of Poling applies to the crystal state, which requires that the number of different structural groups in the crystal be minimal. In fact, the criteria V* and S presented state the extent to which this rule is met. The results of crystallographic analysis of structures show that the process of ordering the configuration of atoms by symmetry operations, and primarily by translational symmetry, is of fundamental importance. The above formulated mechanism of this symmetry from the position of statistical physics [15] opens the possibility of quantitative calculations of the energy of crystal structures with the involvement of a mathematical apparatus for elastic fluctuations in condensed environments [8]. This is the continuation of the crystal kingdom studies that E.S. Fedorov had begun. Figure one. A one-dimensional model of string oscillation: nodes with zero amplitude and bulk at maximum. Figure 2. Elementary cell of diamond (a): black circles  carbon atoms, empty  empty positions in I-cell with a parameter of 1/2a. Spinel MgAl2O4: b  placement of atoms in one of the four octants of the structure cell, oxygen anions by the law of diamond center all octants of this structure, Mg cationes at the four vertices and center; in  placement of atoms in the four octants of the structure cell, all eight octants of the structure cell are centered: four  atoms of Al, four  atoms of O (Al  small black circle). CsSi2O6 (g): idealized scheme of atom placement at key positions in 1/8th part of the crystal cell of the pollucite structure, cation cation Csedded, (Al) cationed, (Al) cationed, mixed from the analogy of position of Al V V (FVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVV Al2Ca3 (SiO4)3 (j) granate: placement of cation in the octave of the cubic elementary cell structure: the icosahedral configuration of 12 cation Sa and Si, inscribed in the cube of cation Al, also centered on Al. The three-axis structure is shown. Projection to plane: a  xy hexagonal structures with large (large) circles (Ba, Sr) and medium (small painted circles) cation (Al, V, Fe), anions  empty small circles; b  yz SrAl12O19 and crossings to planes (0010) in case of a lattice (Sr + O) (smooth lines) and (0014) in case of a lattice (Al + Sr) (shr) (shr)); in  yz BazFe18O27 and crossings to planes (0014) of a lattice (Va + O) (smooth lines) and a flat-lattice (0020) of a line (Bair lines); g zVO11, yzVVV (smooth lines) with a partial (smooth) and a flat (smooth) (008) (smooth) with a fixed (smooth) + (smooth) + (smooth) + (smooth) + (smooth) + (smooth) + (smooth) + (smooth) + (smooth) + (smooth) + (smooth) + (s) + (smooth) + (s) + (s) + ( Table 1 is the same. The parameters of the cubic structures Table two. The parameters of the hexagonal structures